# Stock-Market-Analysis-EDA
Part A - Summary
Article - Stock Market Anomalies and Stock Market Anomaly Detection are two different things
The article speaks about the difference between stock market anomalies vs anomaly detection methods on the same. Efficiency Market Hypothesis states that the stock prices already reflect all past publicly available information and hence there is no way to beat the market to obtain abnormal returns. This hypothesis rather sounds like a naive approach to analyzing stock market data because there is always the possibility of using inside information and mislead the market in the eyes of the public. In simple terms using this inside information is the "presence of anomaly" in the stock market data and having a predictive machine learning model that can find this anomaly before it actually affects the investors is "Anomaly Detection". The article provides a general guideline of how the two can be identified in a market situation.
There are eight types of typical market anomalies that are identified through out the study of finance literatures.
1. Momentum - A stock price keeps rising/decline beyond the expected point.
2. January Effect - The stock which incurred heavy loses in the fourth quarter outperforms in January.
3. Weekend Phenomenon - Stocks perform better on Fridays than Mondays.
4. Book to Market Ratio - Comparing book value of a company to its stock price.
5. Neglected stocks - Stocks of lesser known companies generating high values.
6. Price Reversal - Stocks whose values kept increasing/decreasing notice a reversal in trend.
7. Earnings surprise - The reported earnings and expected earnings vary greatly.
8. Small firm effect - Small firms outperforming larger companies.
While many of the above factors may seem like possible ways to identify anomalies, they are however mostly based off of logic and are subject to biases based on investors expectations. In such scenarios we can always use advanced predictive models to predict the course of change that is likely to happen to the stock price of a firm.
Anomaly detection is the phenomenon of using various available statistical and machine learning algorithms to detect outliers present in the stock market data. These outliers are nothing but anomalies. "Market Manipulation" is a common form of anomaly present in the stock market. In this method the price of the stock is deliberately being intervened and made misleading to the public world. This is made possible through actual trading orders in order to make the process look seamless. This is called "Trade based Manipulation" and this causes a lot of investors to lose their money because they start making assumptions based on the market is performing without actually knowing that the trend is being intentionally intervened and distorted.
"Illegal Insider Trading" is another form of manipulation. In this form inside information is used in trading which again leads to potential loses for innocent investors. There are a couple of symptoms’ which can be used to identify such illegal insider information trading - Unusually high trading volumes , Abnormal price fluctuations and options as cost efficient channel. the article beautifully describes how a 20% profit can be made into a 900% profit using option call as a channel.
Finally, the article concludes by saying how FINRA has appointed new surveillance groups to monitor the anomalies in the market and how an early detection system is the requirement at hand. I personally believe that there is no point in detecting an occurrence after it has occurred. Rather the need of the hour is to utilize the power of machine learning and implement methods that can detect the anomaly before it has occurred so that we may save the millions of dollars for the innocent people who would lose it otherwise.
